---
description: ''
dateModified: '2016-07-05T12:42:50.314Z'
datePublished: '2016-07-05T12:43:02.790Z'
title: ''
author: []
starred: false
sourcePath: _posts/2016-07-05-d5517711-1e28-4f23-96c7-2e1a86a6d4e9.md
inFeed: true
hasPage: false
inNav: false
_type: MediaObject

---
They proclaimed it dead with 2001 nails in the coffin but d'n'b' restless heart drum machine beats to it's own tune. We dropped the needle and several artists, thinkers and participants in the scene set the warped record straight. Thanks to Calibre, Nicky Blackmarket, Ed Case, Utah Jazz, J Majik, Andy C, DJ Suv, Tony Coleman, and DJ SS for their time and words.

  
INTRO:

"I think d'n'b is the most futuristic music out there, the most forward music using technology and equipment to the maximum. This is the music of the future and we are in that future."

J MAJIK

Pre-Millennial Tension is high. Electronic dance music has spawned several potent variants of its bastardised break beat spores: It's Drum'n'Bass's time to shine.

When "Inner-city Life" dropped on Goldie's Metalheadz label, the zeitgeist of the post-rave metro-dweller's desolation and aspirations had been captured and distilled:

This generation uses "cipha's" to decipher -- seances through the "cyber".

Since d'n'b's inception the genre's energy resembles the after-shock of an explosion with London as the inimitable epicentre:

"Its still the capital, its where the web originates from, but the thing is

worl-wide now. The US now has about 15 times the amount of people

listening to the music now. They took a bite from the apple and keeping biting

and biting. Every other week there are \[UK\] DJs there now." DJ SS

  
The infectious amalgamated sounds of break beat, techno, and dub reggae spread quickly through the metropolitan, urban settlements of the U.K (i.e. Manchester, Leeds, Bristol, Southampton) and touched youths from every background.

Teens from estate's running mob deep in swathes of Versace and Iceberg, the ragga boyz and girlz in Paco Paco and Click suits -- while the Glow-stick massive were throwing lighter's in the air up alongside subversive suburban bad-boyz

Enter extreme media attention and scrutiny -- Centre stage:

Ask any number of participants in the ongoing scene and it's conclusive

"The problem is the media and big corporates all got on to it at the same time and prematurely pushed it up..."

An impassioned DJ SUV whilst taking a break from REPRAZENT'S hectic schedule)

speaks on the nature of vulturism which swamped the landscape.

"This is the new thing, this is the trendy thing...show us...show us...show us!' and it prematurely pushed a baby out there, when it is still a relatively young music. If you check HipHop and how long that's been going and how long it took for the media and the corporate world to understand and accept it, it's been well over 2 decades."

The feelings from the jungle community towards the mainstream media is eloquently summed up by jungle stalwart Nicky Blackmarket.

"I don't really follow the media - I'm not really into that, its' just the same

thing that UK Garage is doing now. It was here before the media took interest and will be afterwards."

And echoes run concurrent from the Fallen Angel camp...

"No one really cares \[about the media\]. Mixmag etc only seem to focus on the 'Ibiza

thing'.

**UTAH JAZZ** speaks in complete tandem with his fellow scenesters.

"There was the initial pick-up and then it stopped getting attention. It was

always getting love from those within the scene; ATM, Knowledge, Drum and Bass

Arena have always catered for the hardcore and have helped fundamentally. Drum

and Bass Arena gets 15,000 hit a day!"

**ANDY C** enthuses on the upward spiral that the scene seems to be following...

"The 'press' are 'shy' of us. But the movement is growing and getting stronger

even without their attention. When I hear "Jungle's dead", I ask people if

they're out at the clubs and festivals and seen the energy out there. I tell

them to witness it, because wherever I played in the last year it's been

firing. There's a nex generation out there now, we're like 8 years on now, but

the music's like a juggernnaut and keeps rolling on.

The music's going through resurgence and there are producers and DJs more

willing to explore different angles. You can go out and every DJ will

be playing different styles with the same energy levels and quality, which is

excellent for the music and those involved in it."

  
Major label's bidding wars, fuck up's on release dates, scandals and egotism were becoming the new order. The music's undeniably global -- And it had begun to impact on foreign shores, no longer controllable by an elite:

Or as J MAJIK eloquently puts it:

"We all have a little bit tunnel vision in England and it's all a bit clique based. We all go down to Music House and it's all the same people down there.

There's only a few sort of producers that emerge each year and it all does seem to boil down to the same 10 producers who've been doing it for the last 5 years. People like Dillinja, Optical and Bukem. There are certain people who will always make good music

While DJ SUV expands on this viewpoint immaculately:

"Wherever you go, they're all at a different 'timezone' for Drum and Bass. Everyone gets the music at the same time, but we've come up through Rave and developed. America didn't get it for a while because there were some Rave tunes that were totally shit, it was raw and homemade but we took what we wanted from that and developed it.

There's never just a specific place or sound for me. Which is why I did the 'Desert Rose' thing. It's sounds I recorded in Spain and I've gone around the world and incorporated different sounds into my music. I really get excited and buzzed of a new culture and a new style of music. I love Moroccan music, which I wasn't open to before.

If I'm making Drum and Bass using Moroccan influences it might introduce someone else to the scene and draw their ideas out. That's what makes me excited."

  
But (still) the jaundiced perception of fragmentation seems to seep through the pixelated pores of the "jungle" scene in the UK at an alarming rate:

Instance: take in the alternative view of jungle escapee/ U.K. Garage's uber-producer/Gorillaz collaborator ED case

"I think with Drum and Bass it became a lot more technical. It started going along with the boom of Vestax, Technics and mixing equipment and It became a specialised music. The difference between that and Garage is that Garage has a lot more hooks that radio can pick up on. I don't like the idea of things been labelled as in 'that's commercial'...I'd like to think it runs a bit deeper than that with music."

Is it distancing or diversifying? Ed Case skipped from making Jungle to banging out UK Garage at the switch of a hi-hat. Others such as SUV see no boundaries whilst Adam F's high profile HipHop project has garnered criticism and admiration in equal measures

" I was first introduced to the music world via Fresh 4 in 89 and that included DJ Krust and we were fortunate enough to use Smith & Mighty's studio at the time. That's really how we learnt to merge breakbeats and other sounds:"

DJ SUV doesn't reminisce but re-threads a stitch in time through to his new material

"It was then called a 'BristolSound. It didn't sound like Drum and Bass but that was part of the path that lead to d'n'b. So for me to diversify out of d'n'b is not really a new or big thing."

**Adam F's** leap foward

"I always expected that as soon as Adam (F) did his hip-hop project people were going to say he's turned away from d'n'b. He's a producer who's decided to make Drum and Bass music as well as other music, that's the background he comes from.

With the HipHop thing, it's a project, because he gets more bookings now for DJ'ing d'n'b than ever before, so for people to believe he's turned his back because he's working with all these huge HipHop artists is simply not true. I know he didn't want to talk about Drum and Bass in his interviews because it's a completely separate project."

The code of the beats is a rocky path which demands an unbending loyalty - the crazy glue that keeps a 'sound' alive...

"A lot of D&B artists and producers will admit that but every scene goes through that and the Speed Garage scene will probably go through that, where people will get dis\[s-\]illusioned, but it all depends on the producers who are leading." **J MAJIK**

The constant push and pull effects of the underground eventually cause collision.

"Alex Reece was into techno and when he got into D'n'B he brought a new sound to

the scene, 'jazz-step' etc. A lot of people have been asking him and Wax Doctor

to do more vocal tracks right now, but they feel like they've done it now and

want to bring something new.

Up until last summer when I played him some new music Alex hadn't really heard of Ed- Rush and Optical or Bad Company, or heard their stuff. He doesn't listen to or buy that much d'n'b, but loves making it! Like Omni Trio and Photek he doesn't want to get involved in the politics of the scene." **UTAH JAZZ**

And yet, some shadowy 'Dr Titus' figure has released a cultural virus into the global audio ocean; why do **you** think the planet's been getting hotter?

Andy C speculates;

"There are scenes everywhere - from Puerto Rico to Poland, Iceland, Denmark,

parties in caves - everywhere. It has \[d'n'b\] engraved itself across the world on the same

level as House, Techno, Trance. I played after Richie Hawton recently, it

was a cool that \[the event\] was organised to show the spectrum of dance music." ANDY C

  
Late '90s Goldie parachuted to the position of "21st century B-Boy", "The face of Jungle/d'n'b" and all-round ambassador to the scene.

Unfortunately, without the ground support i.e. relentlessly tearing up floors with every Metalheadz released 12inch after 12inch, changing people's lives with seminal DJ sets on tap and finding time to frequent celeb columns in corny sociate soirees -- He was fighting an uphill battle.

"I think around '94-'95 were the most exciting times, but whenever you look at other music, particularly House and HipHop and Soul, there's always been templates that everyone reverts to and it' the same with Drum and Bass."

**CALIBRE **no -nonsense Irish vox accentuates all facts as they are. "I live away from London, being isolated meant I had to develop my own style and there's not that much more to do in Belfast apart from going to the same clubs and pubs. The fact that it's starting to spread across the world has asserted it place. It's not really a fad, it's evolved on it's own. People are obsessed with whatever is running at a certain time and it's true that music does fluctuate in terms of quality but a lot of people automatically equate that with a lack of success once it's not in the public eye."

And to the musically savvy ears of the kids up and down the UK and beyond, the whirring snares of the "Amen" break, the hauntingly desperate vocals of "Inner-City life" -- the call and response bass riff from "Brown paper bag" represent "a certain time", or a moment of "Flava". Like 138 - trek by Zinc, Mr.Oizo's Levi-powered romp or Fatboy Slim's sanitised skank.

Signs of the times and the times are changing, as everything seems to revert back on itself. The circle is never really completed because the music stays in motion

In an almost clairvoyant moment of call and response UTAH JAZZ's thoughts run parralel with the forward thinking Irish producers mood...

"'94, '95, '96 was the best I've ever seen, but now is the closest I've seen to

that coming round again Worldwide it's now as good as it ever was and give it till next summer, it will be unsurpassed."

95-97 a walk into any self-respecting indie dance record shop would reveal 4-8 different categories within the music sections. Jungle's permeating quality was always the ability to assimilate and optimise the influences brought to it.

  
Photek, Peshay, Roni and LTJ Bukem have each been actively honing, refining and diversifying the outer strata -- spheres of the music. Bukem,

alluding to the alternative directions within breakbreat mastery with the Good Cooking EP --showing Drum'n'Bass could be both understated and musical, 'muso's' and aficionado's were silenced: the media played up to the polarities which existed and hailed him espousing euphemistic statements like **"I'm into Bukem's stuff, it's not too dark."**

The Bristol crew were the dark horses in this period -- stepping into the limelight from the fringes, geographically. This self-contained unit were unerring in their deeply rhythmic funk -- releasing roller after roller with the precision and devastation of a guerrilla campaign. Image as deftly groomed as any US rap group and a militaristic marketing and promotion strategy which set them up to rival London's dominance in terms of production and presentation, with a keenly focussed world-view.

The new-found "confidence" of Cool Britannia, and her cultural exports:

"Yeah! The English Culture, that's our culture. We haven't had that, let's be proud of it at least. It always seems to get stopped or put into a box or category. Really it's a sub-culture of England which has had influences from America and all around the world, so really it's a worldwide thing." DJ SUV

And the confidence shows...

"There's a lot of good music out there, especially the main labels.

People are getting music out quicker, and there are a bigger variety of sounds.

Even the new artists are on it! Apart from the 'big name' House DJs, we travel

more regularly than any of them." **DJ SS**

An understated positively brims on the scene's state of health.

"It's good. It's a British Underground movement. Certain elements crossover,

like Goldie and Size. At the end of the day its an underground scene."

**NICKY BLACKMARKET**

Enter a sexy, soulful, bumpy and slinky new kid on the block -- **UK Garage.**

"I think right now UK Garage has proved itself to be the music of the young, people from 12 to 25, that's their music right now especially in the main cities. Maybe not in the rural areas where's its very much still house.

I think the future's just going to see it split up into dark Garage, Breakbeat Garage and it's already starting to happen, but as long as you cover everything with the mixes...'cuz it's just going to get harder and harder with the mixes, trying to make that one definitive mix that covers everything.

I can see there been a sort of fusion with the R&B that they're making in America and the UK Garage if it's done in the right way. Like the halftime thing could work with the 2 step beats but it's bit funny at the moment. A lot of the US producers will try and do it because of the UK Garage and that's where it'll just take off and keeps forming into something totally different ." ED CASE

"All the chancers + rincers jumped off + went to UK garage. Now

some of them are coming back unfortunately." TONY COLEMAN

"Any scene when it begins has that initial excitement and rush, you could call

that it's 'golden age' or beginning. It's happened with Acid, House, D'n'B and

now with UK Garage, every scene has its cycles." ANDY C

"All its done it is cleaned up the scene, all the fakers jumped on UK Garage and

the true heads are dere. When the clear-out happened in '93-'94 the music went

all dark, the result was it cleared the fakers. Its not deliberately done;

it's the way the scene goes." DJ SS

  
The shock waves of the initial blast was resonating around the Globe -- people were repulsed/turned-on/inspired and most of all intrigued by the alien sounds of Drum'n'Bass: Germany, Brazil, Canada, France, US, Ireland - the harsh electronic collage of d'n'b was expanding beyond our fair Island.

"I don't really get a lot of stuff from America or know of lot of DJs from out there.

I've played there a lot, last year I must have done at least 25 gigs out there and it's on par with England.

LA has areally big scene with big raves like 'Tribal Gathering' Their Drum and Bass crowds are more like our 'Hardcore' crowds over here. They're sucking dummies, they're younger and there's more of a drug culture which we had from Acid House days.

Adam and I have a residency out there for this massive thing called'36 Degrees' and they have parties with like 40,000 people and Armand Van Helden is in one room.

San Francisco has big nights, so does New York.

DJ Dara and Deiselboy are really big over there and I licenced some tracks out for a compilation he's doing but in the same way I think there's a stigma with British HipHop where it might go all over Europe but the Americans turn there nose up at it, it's similar to our scene...Drum and Bass has always had a British stamp, so they've created there own because America's big enough to warrant that and those guys don't really care about the rest of the world. Most Americans I've met haven't even been outsude America." J MAJIK

"Canada: Torontos changes seem to be following the pattern of 12 years ago in

the U.K at the moment." NICKY BLACKMARKET

No, it's always been about the UK though - it's changing now, great tunes at

last from Influx datum + Roy Dank in the USA, and of course brazil is rulin

right now...TONY COLEMAN

Heads in all the above regions were generating the vital street-level buzz which followed the initial blast in the UK -- but in tune with their own cultural influences -- the data flows were the same: trading jungle fever cassettes @ college, getting smoked out on the weekends to Elevation videos, conversing with likeminded people about hardware over software -- setting up club nights to hear the music, shops to sell it, and rough and ready studios to make the renegade sounds they'd been hit by.

Theres the Fabrics.† The Midlands, Birmingham and Sheffield are all firing.

In the US the ravers are really young, but the amount of DJs and events in

unbelievable.

Germany is smashing it.† Australia is my personal Spot, Its really deep. DJ SS

I think Drum and Bass is coming of age. It's the biggest it's been worldwide. The problem is a few media and big corporates all got on to it at the same time and prematurely pushed it up:'...DJ SUV

Nico Sykes burst through the electronic scene after a musically diverse career as a studio engineer working with players and bands as musically diverse as Ruby Turner and Motorhead @ the Marquis studio in London's media hub, Soho. And then the No-U-Turn label/studio came into being, the newest creation:

DeepStep: Electric soul grooves -- the 1st Turn U On release is "One you need" an agelessly funky ensemble. \#2 is Electro Bass. The main proponents of this movement within the No-U-Turn lab are Horsepower, described simply as "3 guys who love to put hours into studio time -- mixing up the right amount of Dub Reggae and tricky editing to create a definite London feel. The processes they use are unique.... You can Hear a Horsepower track"

The ear catching releases of Future Cut, Virus and Bad Company was emerging from the scene and many of the people who'd built things up were slowing down and younger heads were taking shit into their own hands. The main complaint was it was all becoming too tech -- The human feel was missing.

There were a lot more people just doing their own thing on the scene and there's people like Optical who was making wicked tunes which were selling a lot, There's Bad Company who virtually came out of nowhere and started having big hits and everyone wanted to make music like them. It all comes down to influences. People just jumped unto that bandwagon and weren't as good as Bad Company and then suddenly there's a whole market flooded with noise and the trend ran from there I think it' easier to make a nosy tune that goes off rather than a musical tune that goes off. It was just an easy way out for a lot of people.

Optical's just got that little bit more than other producers, he can make a tune that's noisy but with a little bit more class to it .I think he' s undoubtedly the best producer in the scene. J MAJIK

Dillinja stands tall in the scene as one of the enduring artist's of the genre, maintaining rock solid production values to brew up the fat shit unquestionably: staying in the relative shadows of limited overseas DJ sets, and generally avoiding interviews and photo shoots.

Interesting new projects have come in the particular shapes of remixology and collaborations between drum'n'bass producers and other musicians from other fields. R'n'B and Hip-hop a have infiltrated the sensibilities of the drum'n'bass community. Missy Elliot, Aliyah, Method Man, Saul Williams and Brian McKnight have all had the D'n'B makeover -- to slamming effect.

I think around 94,95 it was the most exciting but whenever you look at other music, particularly House and HipHop and Soul, there's always templates that everyone reverts to and it' the same with Drum and Bass. The fact that it's starting to spread across the world has asserted it place. It's not really a fad,, it's evolved on it's own. People are obsessed with whatever' is running at a certain time and it's true that music does fluctuate in terms of quality. A lot of people equate a lack of success with it not been in the public eye.CALIBRE

Im also working on a band concept with a crew of live musicians with

a serious edge. In terms of production and writing songs, more

vocals.† Just trying different forms, still dnb though, but incorporating

rnb, deep house grooves you know? DJ SS

I think Drum and Bass is definitley at the highest peak it's ever been with two step garage been borne out of it and even Hip Hop with their high hats. Even Madonna is using filters on her vocals which is a D&B technique. I think Drum and Bass is the most futuristic music out there, the most forward music using technology and equipment to the maximum. This is the music of the future and we are in that future

I don't actually like the name Drum and Bass. It changed from Jungle Music which changed from Rave Music and if you really want to follow it back you could have even called it House or even Hip Hop. It's basically the same movement of people involved in the culture from then onwards. I call it future music, it's also techno...it's also Reggae, it's also Breakbeat, it's everything. DJ SUV

The artists on label are coming to the fore and diversifying their styles, we're going into the studio and following the vibe and coming out.† There's a willingness to try loads of

different things, at whatever tempo that might be. ANDY C

I want to keep doing it all, some hard tunes. Some house orientated stuff even though I hesitate to say House, because it's only about the elements like 'Love is not a game'

I think it's about just keeping it on the vibe it's on at the moment and just keeping it less serious. J MAJIK

  
  
  
The anomaly of D'n'B's return to the underground is clearly exemplified in it's survival -- It has become better produced, more accessible, the DJ's can mix better, the clubs are better. The biggest clubs up and down the country still support it by promoting weeklies/monthlies and more artists are selling more records.

If you check the specialist \[music\] shops the sales of dance music would be Top

20, last week we sold 17, 000 copies of 'Bodyrock', it penetrated the Top 75 and

entered at 58.† D'n'B is on an upward cycle at the moment, maybe we could seeing

it going platinum soon.

Peak of DnB in the mid-90s ?

Right now I'm putting my records together to play tonight, I buzz offa the

positivity and feelings when your out there playing to a crowd.

It was my dream to play clubs!† I'm still innit!

I'm taking out a spare pair of clothes out with me, the heat in the clubs means

you can be leaving a stone lighter!

There's so music positivity and energy from the crowds that over the last year I

ahaven't had a quiet night.ANDY C

In terms of saying sales have gone down, I don't think that's true. If you look at the last 6 years the only tunes that made it into the charts were Roni Size, 'inner City Life' didn't even make the Top 40, then Adam F and Alex Reese..

This year I had something in the charts and Kosheen. This year I think D&B has been better than ever.' BodyRock' nearly went Top40 but that's a really underground single.I think it's finally coming out of the lull, it's been for that last 2 years where people moved on to Speed Garage because the music was boring! J MAJIK

Nu labels from future cut + marcus i, V, Fireclowm (Delta's label), tru playaz,

anyone holding it down ina soulfull fat + uplifting stylee. nites: Hospitality

at HErbal (our nu monthly residency in London - 3rd Friday every month at Herbal

in Hoxton.) swerve, movement. + The Bomb in Nottingham of course. TONY COLEMAN

There are so many good tunes at the moment, but Creative Source and Prototype

and Fabio and Grooveriders Radio 1 show is wicked for the profile of DnB,

its serves as an outlet to the community, live on internet or whatever.

Danny Byrd and Twisted Individual \[Formation records\] have some interesting

material forthcoming. UTAH JAZZ

I like Total Science, Marcus Intallex, a lot of the Brazillian boys and there's a couple of guys coming out of Miami, High Contrast out of Cardiff. At the moment there's a lot of international producers that are highlighting the spread of the music. Plus you've got people like the Tru Playaz who I have a lot of respect for. The media are highlighting the fact that Adam F and Photek are making different music now but nobody's contracted to making a certain music their whole life. I don't think I'll be making Drum and Bass when I'm 40.At the end of the day it's all about music and a lot of people want to be perceived as artists rather than just Drum and Bass producers. It''s an all encompassing term for a wide range of music because the stuff that Bad Company make is very different from Bukem and the Brazillian stuff isn't the same as Total Science.CALIBRE

  
DJ Kane of Kool fm/Undiluted/Sonic Art lineage has enjoyed a " Slow gradual climb through the scene, there's been high and low, but I never thought, 'Oh Well, I need to find something else to do.' It's a cycle and we need to find elevation within the cycle -- I'm comfortable", " In my experience the underground by definition has never had the exposure due.... What's going on in the mainstream media isn't always the engine of the scene!"

It has in reality grown up and spread outwards. The concentration of talent and involvement in the music is no longer unique **to** London -- It was created from a mixture of elements and cultures, which by nature change and adapt. Just as the current shockwaves of the Nu-Breakz movement sweep through our areas and districts it will undoubtedly lose its initial impact in much the same way as D'n'B, Hip-Hop, Punk, Rock'n'Roll, Jazz did in their inceptions.