---
description: ''
dateModified: '2016-07-05T13:09:34.509Z'
datePublished: '2016-07-05T13:26:35.664Z'
title: ''
author: []
starred: false
sourcePath: _posts/2016-07-05-e0416756-2d8e-42f0-8736-1361ed297cde.md
inFeed: true
hasPage: false
inNav: false
_type: MediaObject

---
**Trident --funk**

Plants are phototropic, they react to their environmental stimuli, as organisms they are robust and adaptable, whilst symbolising nature's life-force in the form of order and beauty. It all perpetuates the cycle of birth, growth, death and renewal from the seed and **Root **on up: root**/ **v. & n. 1\. _The part of a plant normally below the ground, attaching it to the earth and conveying nourishment to it from the soil._

**Root Jackson** is a family man, hailing from the eastern Caribbean Island of Carriacou, and one of the foot soldiers of the Windrush generation. An early partnership with his cousin Jenny Jackson provided an entry into a late swinging sixties British music industry. In effect, when **Root and Jenny Jackson** were signed to Beacon Records in '66 with a distribution deal with EMI they were one of very few black British signings, and as a result toured Europe on a solid musical set of steel whilst blowing roofs of studios for 12" purposes. When the U.K scene was shape shifting circa 1969 European markets sustained their wide fan base, and it was on tour in Italy that Root and Jenny parted company, and where Jenny was to rename home. This elder statesman of funk bounced back with the co-creation of the early 70's band, **F.B.I** (Funky Band Incorporated). Who as a collective set a benchmark for a unique and discernibly British based brand of liquid funk. Musically they broke previous and resulting moulds, the percussion, string, and horn laden tracks were tighter, full of more grit and funky shit than a pair of batty-riders over carnival. The innovative and musically intuitive ensemble recorded one album together and split shortly afterwards, despite this the eponymously titled album (reissued on Kongo records) stands testament their organic home-grown brand of dynamic funk. Root's voice scales from a piercing treble with warm bass-ridden edges to a brassy rich growl, whilst continuously spraying soul from a whisper to a scream.

Nowadays Root is still flexing his vocal muscles around town, and might be caught between the studio recording his long-awaited solo joint, in Bob's Good Time Blues Bar slamming and jamming his regular Sunday haunt, or attending to business at Kongo records H.Q. I sneaked a glimpse at the live gig and was blown away by the energy amidst the place, the red lights and rustic saloon bar style is conducive, but it's the fact that there are kids running around, students, locals, and seasoned connoisseurs all _feeling it_. Musically it is a freeform funk extravaganza, songs sort of slide into one another starting and finishing according to the vibe not the time, percussion and bass drive the jam whilst Root spills soul on stage.

This image might be juxtaposed against the more surgical surroundings of the studio, where Root is sculpting **the eagerly awaited solo joint, expected to drop this Autumn**; I sat in while the natural process of weaving a rhythm into a track took place. This entails the skills of 'sitting the bass', driving the tune, and adding style, the meticulous order breaks the tune into atomic particles which when aligned convey solidity and consistency. The quality control is processed through the dome of Root, whose expertise resembles an ocean of musical diversity and is expressed as: a solid head nod, the trademark brassy intonation, and an affirmative huh! Or a hypnotic step. The experience bathes one in sound, it was like being in a funkafied flotation tank, the spatio-temporal world dissolves leaving you with a feeling and the swirling velvety baritone of Root saying: "Equilibrium is a constant level which is trying to be achieved".

_The plant flowers, generates seeds and continues the cycle;_

**D.J Kane **of Kool fm notoriety and currently the only artist to stretch the musical breadth of the **Trouble On Vinyl,** **Renegade Hardware**, and **Renegade Recordi**ngs record labels is softly spoken and serene when we meet. He is also a "**Rebel Without a Draw**", but calmly sets about remedying this situ. On completion of his mission we both w/rapped openly: He began to pour forth his feelings on the unity of the 'scene', and how he and his peers came up representin' a graduatin' class in the 'jungle' of 'drum & bass'. He intensified as he broke it down conjuring the image of the D.J/ producer as an artistic soldier in the war against stank, skank, and snide mercenary sharks in the form of promoters, labels and clubs. The incentives and teasing lures of record company advances appear to be the divisive tactics hinted at and have sharpened this mighty but mellow fellow's senses, and artistic instinct and integrity.

Speaking on his father's involvement in the music bizness he believes he took an almost inevitable step into the cold world, but thanks the salubrious relationship he has with Root as a source of nutrition and grounding. Perhaps it resembles a reflection caught on a deep gentle stream that will remain in flux and yet constant, but will always reflect _truth_.

When we caught up he had just come back from a Japanese & U.S tour, and also relayed that they will be remembered as 'surreal moments' in drum & and bass. It seems the infectious grooves cannot be contained, as he related the scenario of walking into record shops in Japan and seeing reams of recordings from countless raves and dubs featuring himself and the associated T.O.V, Future Forces inc. crew. Having played all around the country and nurturing world-wide impulses he expressed nuff love for U.K heads, specifically shouting: Leeds, Manchester, Liverpool, Brighton, Maidstone, Scotland, Wales, and reports 'they're hungry out there!'

\[Not forgetting all those keeping the London drum & bass scene hot and hazy.\]

When I delved into the technological aspect of synthesised music in terms of the separation of digital from acoustic he spat back:

'I want take \[the sounds of the bass and drum in\] technology to its limit inna raw technique. You see it's an evolution and growth process, but the foundation for this music is set'.

Which I approvingly and fervently nodded to. Kane is presently brewing some potent shit up in the studio, and told me that he believed it was the beats and bass-lines which glue the individuals he works with together secreting a resolution of phasing harmony, spliced with dirty subsonic beats and then poured into wax. He firmly felt that the D.J/Producer stands on the forefront of musical manipulation, and added that the ultimate goal of independence and autonomy is a 'logical progression', but on his terms 'coz the '**System**' sucks.

  
_Moreover, with every generation the progeny of the successive plant retain the hereditary trait's that insure and determine survival:_

Upon our meeting **Vannessa Simon** and myself began to recline and slip into some interactive reasoning, beginning from the start; the £ is the bottom line in this industry, which in turn fuels marketing campaigns and reaches the people. Coming from a 'fringe' is a limitation in this respect as the distinction between art and a well oiled-press machine blur, but this justified cynicism only serves to sharpen the acute observational insight of Ms.Simon. It appears the cliched 'market' analogy is central to the mechanism of record sales in many respects, whilst for the Vannessa this remains farthest removed from the creative aspect, which in turn generates paper for further campaigns. It's a vicious cycle isn't it?

Vannessa's first album aptly named, **Family Madness**, hit the street in 1992, and despite its _real _and engaging lyrics, warm and soothing melodies, and that distinctive lilting, and swirling sugar cane voice it didn't receive the widespread commercial acclaim that it deserved. Last year the follow-up album dropped, **Definitive Source**, a bigger, badder and bolder step, laced with social commentary and some bumping beats. Whispers of the 'off the hook' remixes of the single, '**Can't Deny It**' are indicating an autumn release. This accomplished British-born black lady has already paid dues and collected the props of her contemporaries, including accompanying Omar on tour and recording on his H-bomb tune, 'There's nothing like this'. She has travelled with Soul II Soul on their world tour, and sung with Jamiroquai on his debut album, Emergency on planet Earth, to mention but a few achievements. Collaborations between brother and sister, have yielded a suprisingly slamming brand of synthetic funk e.g. 'Take a look around', and 'The life'. Both artists thread elements of each other's musical dexterity into an uncompromising blend comprising Vannessa's lyric, which invoke and convey sincere feeling and Kane's bastardised break-beat soundscape in a rhythmic aural envelope.

When I pushed the canderel sweet image of the contemporary female soul floating in clouds of love, she responded in term of her song writing; "Love is kool, but what's new, I seek a challenge. If you're 'livin' it' you can relate it clearer." A song comprises of four indivisible elements in her head, a melody, _real_ sounds, lyrical content, and the resonating bass-line.

The importance of a label like Kongo records is invaluable to Vanessa as it eliminates the intrusion into artistic license, creative control and musical integrity is the source of energy in the label camp. As an independent black venture automatic props are bestowed for business sense and pouring back into that from which it was created. Creative control is valued like a diamond set in an aluminium foil world was an emotion conveyed. The props, acknowledgement, and wealth seem to be skimmed or redirected to the golden paths of a number of producers, labels, or industry personalities.

The lasting echo of our meeting was clouded with the determination that music speaks volumes over and above image, giving the poignant example of Tracy Chapman. It was an optimistic prediction that the flourishing independent record label might produce a lasting domino effect to the end of sustaining a bubbling market for experimental and heartfelt musical endeavours.

"All alike but different in so many different ways

You do hear but you don't do what they say

And all the while mistakes may get paid

I'm the end you'll always find

It's too late

To say how you feel and to show

Love you feel inside the bond is so strong it

Could only be family ties

Family Madness Family Madness

(An excerpt from the song, Family Madness,

Written by Simon/Lye-Fook)

_The flux of life and its flourishing cycle of birth, growth, death and renewal are a beautiful symmetry, this **trilogy **is complete, but the cycle repeats._